## APIs for Intellectual History

An API (Application Programming Interface) is how a digital online service or program defines the protocol for accessing its services/functions or data/information, without a user interface in between. APIs can be for programs to interact internally on a computer, or for accessing services from external computers via the internet. For the purposes of this website, the last type of API, known as a web API, is of primary interest. 

On this page I present an example of employing the Danish Royal Library's ([Det Kgl. Bibliotek](https://api.kb.dk/data/text)) API for querying the digital text collection. As described in the outline of digital technologies in the field of Intellectual history, digitized historical text material is the primary digital technology employed by researchers in the field. Free and openly accessible collections of such material such as the Royal Library's collection is a crucial resource in particular for distant reading and digital history, and APIs such as the one presented here is the primary method of accessing these collections. 

The API allows for searching through metadata, text content, or both using a query term, as well as filtering for subcollection, author, genre, and media types. These parameters are set in the API call. It returns various metadata, as well as the full OCR text of the query results. It returns the entire set of query matches in a single JSON file, which can then easily be restructured into an easily processable dataset. Although this information would also be accessible via the user interface on the Royal Library's [website](https://kb.dk), using the API when gathering a corpus of material for advanced processing. Though quite useful, the API is quite old and leaves some to be desired in terms of parameters. For example there is no option for filtering by publication data, and no option for defining the scope of search result to return; you can only receive the entire OCR fulltext of the query match, instead of just getting sentences or paragraphs from the source materials. Other text database retrieval APIs such as for the Eighteenth Century Collections Online corpus, described in the outline of digital technologies in Intellectual history. This API allows for significantly more customizable queries, which is of great use for digital historians. This API is however not freely  accessible.

For demonstration on this website I chose the Europeana search API. Europeana is a European Union-funded project providing free access to European cultural heritage. As with the aforementioned APIs, the Europeana search API allows for searching their collection for items based on metadata, though in contrast the material at Europeana is mainly images as opposed to text. The button at the bottom of the page calls the Europeana API and returns a random image for the query term "aarhus".

### References

Europeana Foundation. “Search API Documentation.” Europeana Foundation Documentation. Accessed December 2, 2025. https://europeana.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/EF/pages/2385739812/Search+API+Documentation.

The Royal Danish Library (Det Kgl. Bibliotek). “Text Data API.” Royal Danish Library API Documentation. Accessed December 2, 2025. https://api.kb.dk/data/text.

