GitHub is a platform for hosting and collaborating on projects, particularly software. The platform is based on the Git system for version control which is to organize and track changes of files on different branches (internal versions of the project, for instance for separate developers) and forks (external independent versions of the software). GitHub makes such tracked projects openly available, allowing for transparent source code and various forms of contributions and feedback from the public; freely accessible projects like this are known as "open source". For research projects, making the project's source code freely available is a crucial aspect of ensuring reprodusibility. Should a project undergo further development after publishing a set of results, accurate version tracking ensures that the appropriate version of the project is available. Furthermore, GitHub offers numerous other tools that can be useful for researchers for presenting their work, such as easily hosting websites or web apps with GitHub pages. For these reasons GitHub is an invaluable tool for research projects. 

Many projects relevant for the field of Intellectual History are made available on GitHub.

For example, [Tesseract](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract) is an open-source OCR (Optical Character Recognition) tool. OCR tools take images containing text as input and outputs text in machine-readable form after somehow identifying the text in the image. Tesseract contains its own OCR engine as well as a command line interface. The OCR engine is built using a neural network architecture and is trained for English, but the repository includes instructions and programs for adapting the engine to other languages with new training data. Tesseract was initially developed between 1985 and 1994 by Hewlett-Packard. It was open-sourced in 2005 and developed by Google from 2006 to 2018 and is now developed and maintained independently.

My field largely concerns itself with analysis of historical text. For "distant reading" and quantitative analysis of corpora of historical text it is necessary to convert this text into machine readable form. Historical text is often very challenging for OCR systems to handle as these texts typically have archaic scripts or are handwritten, they can be structurally messy, and be incomplete or damaged. That being said, a freely available open source tool for OCR made available through GitHub is of great use for digital historians.

[Link to the repository](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract)